In this video, we're going to look at
performing logical operations on our data
using the IF function.
Zara is now ready to actually
start doing her reconciliation and
coming onto the Recon Analysis tab, you'll
notice that there's quite a big difference
between what the supplier statement is
saying and what Zara's data is saying.
Now she needs to work out what's
causing that difference or
correct the error if that's the reason.
So we're going to come and have a look
at our supplier invoice statement and
you'll notice that there have been some
credits, but those credits are showing up
as positive amounts where really we should
be subtracting them from the amount paid.
So we need a calculation that will
check if the type is credit, and
if it is, multiply the amount by -1.
Before we get into this example though,
let's look at a slightly simpler
example of the if statement.
So coming into our invoice report,
the first thing
Zara's going to do is work out
if an invoice is overdue or
not, and we're going to do
this using out if function.
So clicking into M5, we're going
to type "=IF" and open our bracket.
The first thing the IF
wants is a logical test,
this is where you compare two
values using a logical operator.
So for example,
I'm going to check if my payment date
is greater than or
bigger than my due date.
That is an example of a logical test,
a logical test must always
use a logical operator.
There are six you can choose from,
equals, greater than,
less than, greater than or equal to,
less than or equal to, or not equal to.
The logical test will always
return either true or false.
After you've put it in, type a comma and
now you need to put what you want
to happen if it returns true.
So if my payment date is
greater than my due date,
I want to see a Yes in that cell and I put
it in double quotes because it's text.
Then I type another comma and
the last argument the if wants is
what I want to do if it's false.
Well, I just want to leave the cell empty,
but there's a bit of a trick to this.
You need to open your double quotes and
immediately close them.
I'm going to close my bracket for my IF so
you can see it and then press Enter.
And you can see all the overdue
invoices have been flagged with a "Yes".
Now that was a very simple example just
using text, but instead of the text
I could put any calculation I liked and
it could be quite sophisticated.
Let's look at a slightly
more interesting example.
So we're now going to calculate how
many days our invoice is overdue by.
Bear in mind if it's not overdue,
we actually want to just put 0.
We don't want it being
overdue by a negative amount.
So again,
we're going to need our if statement.
We're going to start with our "=IF", and
this time our logical test we're
going to do slightly differently,
we're going to check if the overdue
value is equal to nothing.
If that is the case,
it means it's not overdue.
So type my comma and put 0,
then type another comma.
If it is overdue,
I'm going to need to use my network days
that we looked at in my previous week.
So I'm just going to type "Network Days",
my start date is my due date,
my finish date is my payment date.
And don't forget to include our holidays,
which is a Named Range, so
I can just type "H-O-L" and
Tab, close my brackets for
my NETWORKDAYS and
close my brackets for my IF.
And when I press Enter,
it has now calculated
the correct overdue days for each invoice.
So there were two really good examples,
let's go back now and
solve Zara's problem.
So back in our supplier invoice statement,
we're going to come to Q2,
the calculation of the dollar amount,
and we're going to double click.
Now the first part of the calculation
is absolutely fine, so
we're not going to change that.
But what we're going to do
is take that result and
if it's a credit,
we're going to multiply it by -1.
If it's not, we'll just multiply
it by 1 so it doesn't change.
So after our black bracket,
we're going to type out times then
our if and open our brackets.
Our logical test is going to be to check
if our type is equal to credit,
then a comma.
If it's true, we're going to need
to multiply by -1, and a comma.
If it isn't,
we're just going to multiply by 1.
Now close your bracket for
your if and press Enter.
You'll see all the values have stayed
the same except the two credits,
which are now negative, fantastic.
Back in our Recon Analysis,
we've made a huge difference and
are one step closer to completing it.
So just to recap, when you need a
calculation that will do different things
under different circumstances, probably
find that the if will solve your problem.